README.md, before:

# go_hsm

A Go-based, extendable implementation of HSM Module (Thales/Racal), featuring WASM plugin support and a clean command pattern for easy extension.

Table of Contents
-----------------
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Features](#features)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Clone Repository](#clone-repository)
  - [Build WASM Plugins](#build-wasm-plugins)
  - [Generate Plugin Wrappers](#generate-plugin-wrappers)
  - [Build the Server](#build-the-server)
  - [Build the CLI](#build-the-cli)
  - [Install the CLI](#install-the-cli)
  - [Run the Server](#run-the-server)
  - [Testing](#testing)
  - [Cleaning](#cleaning)
- [CLI Usage](#cli-usage)
  - [HSM Server](#hsm-server)
  - [PIN Block Generation](#pin-block-generation)
- [Writing a New Command](#writing-a-new-command)
  - [1. Implement Business Logic](#1-implement-business-logic)
  - [2. Add go:generate Stub](#2-add-generate-stub)
  - [3. Generate Wrapper](#3-generate-wrapper)
  - [4. Build the Plugin](#4-build-the-plugin)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Introduction

go_hsm is a modular HSM server written in Go. It uses TinyGo to compile individual command handlers into WASM plugins, isolating business logic from WASM scaffolding. This design makes it easy to add new commands and maintain a clean codebase.

## Features

- Separate package for WASM memory and error helpers (`pkg/hsmplugin`).
- Business logic in `internal/hsm/logic`—one file per command.
- CLI tool (`cmd/plugingen`) to generate plugin wrappers.
- Hot-reload support via `SIGHUP`.
- Structured logging and error handling.

## Project Structure

```
├── cmd
│   ├── go_hsm
│   │   ├── main.go          # CLI entry point
│   │   └── cmd              # Cobra commands
│   │       ├── root.go      # Root command
│   │       ├── serve.go     # Start HSM server
│   │       └── pinblock.go  # PIN block generation command
│   └── plugingen
│       └── main.go          # CLI tool for plugin wrapper generation
├── commands             # WASM plugin sources and binaries
│   ├── A0
│   ├── BU
│   ├── DC
│   ├── EC
│   ├── NC
│   ├── A0.wasm
│   ├── BU.wasm
│   ├── DC.wasm
│   ├── EC.wasm
│   └── NC.wasm
├── internal             # Internal server and HSM implementations
│   ├── cli              # CLI utilities (formatting, operations)
│   ├── errorcodes       # HSM error codes
│   ├── hsm              # HSM core and command logic
│   │   └── logic        # Command implementations
│   ├── logging          # Structured logging
│   ├── plugins          # Plugin manager
│   └── server           # Server implementation
├── pkg                  # Public packages
│   ├── cryptoutils      # Cryptographic utilities
│   ├── hsmplugin        # WASM plugin helpers
│   ├── pinblock         # PIN block algorithms and formats
│   └── variantlmk       # LMK handling utilities
├── Makefile
├── README.md
├── go.mod
└── go.sum
```

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.24+
- TinyGo for WASM (`brew install tinygo`)
- GNU Make
- Makefile provides convenient targets (`make help`).
- Install the `plugingen` code generator:

```bash
go install github.com/andrei-cloud/go_hsm/cmd/plugingen@latest
```
Ensure `$GOPATH/bin` or `$HOME/go/bin` is in your `PATH`.

### Clone Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/andrei-cloud/go_hsm.git
cd go_hsm
```

### Build WASM Plugins

Compile all command plugins via Makefile:

```bash
make plugins
```

### Generate Plugin Wrappers

Run Go generate for all commands via Makefile (uses `plugingen`):

```bash
make gen
```

### Build the Server

Compile the server binary:

```bash
make build
```

### Build the CLI

Compile the CLI binary:

```bash
make cli
```

### Install the CLI

Install the CLI to your GOPATH/bin:

```bash
make install
```

### Run the Server

Start HSM server (JSON logs by default):

```bash
make run
```

For human-readable logs:

```bash
HUMAN=true DEBUG=true make run
```

### Testing

Run tests via Makefile:

```bash
make test
```

### Cleaning

Remove built binaries:

```bash
make clean
```

## CLI Usage

### HSM Server

Start the HSM server:

```bash
go_hsm serve
```

Options:
- `-p, --port`: Server port (default ":1500").
- `--lmk`: LMK hex value (default "0123456789ABCDEFFEDCBA9876543210").
- `--debug`: Enable debug logging.
- `--human`: Enable human-readable logs.

### PIN Block Generation

Generate a PIN block:

```bash
go_hsm pinblock --pin 1234 --pan 4111111111111111 --format 01
```

List supported formats:

```bash
go_hsm pinblock --list-formats
```

## Writing a New Command

Follow the pattern of **A0** and **NC** commands.

### 1. Implement Business Logic

Create a new file in `internal/hsm/logic`, e.g. `FO.go`:

```go
// ExecuteFO handles the FO command payload.
func ExecuteFO(input []byte) ([]byte, error) {
    // parse input, call HSM, format response
    // use decryptUnderLMK(data) and encryptUnderLMK(data) functions and logDebug(msg) provided by the logic package.
}
```

The following host functions are exported to the WASM module and available in `internal/hsm/logic/host.go`:

```go
//go:wasm-module env
//export EncryptUnderLMK
func wasmEncryptUnderLMK(ptr, length uint32) uint64

//go:wasm-module env
//export DecryptUnderLMK
func wasmDecryptUnderLMK(ptr, length uint32) uint64

//go:wasm-module env
//export log_debug
func wasmLogToHost(s string)
```

Add unit tests in `internal/hsm/logic/FO_test.go`.

### 2. Add go:generate Stub

In `commands/FO/gen.go`:

```go
//go:generate plugingen \
//    -cmd=FO \
//    -logic=github.com/andrei-cloud/go_hsm/internal/hsm/logic \
//    -out=.
package main
```

### 3. Generate Wrapper

Run in the new command directory:

```bash
cd commands/FO
go generate
``` 

This creates `main.go` with the WASM exports.

### 4. Build the Plugin

Compile with TinyGo:

```bash
tinygo build -o ../FO.wasm -target=wasi -scheduler=none -opt=z -no-debug ./commands/FO/main.go
rm ./commands/FO/main.go
```

## Contributing

We welcome new commands and improvements!  
1. Fork the repository.  
2. Implement logic, wrapper stub, and tests.  
3. Submit a pull request describing your command and how it works.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

Commit message:

feat: update Makefile and README for configurable WASM plugin directory; enhance serve command to support custom plugin paths

README.md, after:

# go_hsm

A Go-based, extendable implementation of HSM Module (Thales/Racal), featuring WASM plugin support and a clean command pattern for easy extension.

Table of Contents
-----------------
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Features](#features)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Clone Repository](#clone-repository)
  - [Build WASM Plugins](#build-wasm-plugins)
  - [Generate Plugin Wrappers](#generate-plugin-wrappers)
  - [Build the Server](#build-the-server)
  - [Build the CLI](#build-the-cli)
  - [Install the CLI](#install-the-cli)
  - [Run the Server](#run-the-server)
  - [Testing](#testing)
  - [Cleaning](#cleaning)
- [CLI Usage](#cli-usage)
  - [HSM Server](#hsm-server)
  - [PIN Block Generation](#pin-block-generation)
- [Writing a New Command](#writing-a-new-command)
  - [1. Implement Business Logic](#1-implement-business-logic)
  - [2. Add go:generate Stub](#2-add-generate-stub)
  - [3. Generate Wrapper](#3-generate-wrapper)
  - [4. Build the Plugin](#4-build-the-plugin)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Introduction

go_hsm is a modular HSM server written in Go. It uses TinyGo to compile individual command handlers into WASM plugins, isolating business logic from WASM scaffolding. This design makes it easy to add new commands and maintain a clean codebase. The server now supports a configurable plugin directory, allowing users to specify custom locations for their WASM plugins.

## Features

- Separate package for WASM memory and error helpers (`pkg/hsmplugin`).
- Business logic in `internal/hsm/logic`—one file per command.
- CLI tool (`cmd/plugingen`) to generate plugin wrappers.
- Hot-reload support via `SIGHUP`.
- Structured logging and error handling.

## Project Structure

```
├── cmd
│   ├── go_hsm
│   │   ├── main.go          # CLI entry point
│   │   └── cmd              # Cobra commands
│   │       ├── root.go      # Root command
│   │       ├── serve.go     # Start HSM server
│   │       └── pinblock.go  # PIN block generation command
│   └── plugingen
│       └── main.go          # CLI tool for plugin wrapper generation
├── commands             # WASM plugin sources and binaries
│   ├── A0
│   ├── BU
│   ├── DC
│   ├── EC
│   ├── NC
├── internal             # Internal server and HSM implementations
│   ├── cli              # CLI utilities (formatting, operations)
│   ├── errorcodes       # HSM error codes
│   ├── hsm              # HSM core and command logic
│   │   └── logic        # Command implementations
│   ├── logging          # Structured logging
│   ├── plugins          # Plugin manager
│   └── server           # Server implementation
├── pkg                  # Public packages
│   ├── cryptoutils      # Cryptographic utilities
│   ├── hsmplugin        # WASM plugin helpers
│   ├── pinblock         # PIN block algorithms and formats
│   └── variantlmk       # LMK handling utilities
├── Makefile
├── README.md
├── go.mod
└── go.sum
```

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.24+
- TinyGo for WASM (`brew install tinygo`)
- GNU Make
- Makefile provides convenient targets (`make help`).
- Install the `plugingen` code generator:

```bash
go install github.com/andrei-cloud/go_hsm/cmd/plugingen@latest
```
Ensure `$GOPATH/bin` or `$HOME/go/bin` is in your `PATH`.

### Clone Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/andrei-cloud/go_hsm.git
cd go_hsm
```

### Build WASM Plugins

Compile all command plugins via Makefile:

```bash
make plugins
```

### Generate Plugin Wrappers

Run Go generate for all commands via Makefile (uses `plugingen`):

```bash
make gen
```

### Build the Server

Compile the server binary:

```bash
make build
```

### Build the CLI

Compile the CLI binary:

```bash
make cli
```

### Install the CLI

Install the CLI to your GOPATH/bin:

```bash
make install
```

### Run the Server

Start HSM server (JSON logs by default):

```bash
make run
```

For human-readable logs:

```bash
HUMAN=true DEBUG=true make run
```

### Testing

Run tests via Makefile:

```bash
make test
```

### Cleaning

Remove built binaries:

```bash
make clean
```

## CLI Usage

### HSM Server

Start the HSM server:

```bash
go_hsm serve
```

Options:
- `-p, --port`: Server port (default ":1500").
- `--lmk`: LMK hex value (default "0123456789ABCDEFFEDCBA9876543210").
- `--debug`: Enable debug logging.
- `--human`: Enable human-readable logs.
- `--plugin-dir`: Directory containing WASM plugins (default: `./plugins`).

### PIN Block Generation

Generate a PIN block:

```bash
go_hsm pinblock --pin 1234 --pan 4111111111111111 --format 01
```

List supported formats:

```bash
go_hsm pinblock --list-formats
```

## Writing a New Command

Follow the pattern of **A0** and **NC** commands.

### 1. Implement Business Logic

Create a new file in `internal/hsm/logic`, e.g. `FO.go`:

```go
// ExecuteFO handles the FO command payload.
func ExecuteFO(input []byte) ([]byte, error) {
    // parse input, call HSM, format response
    // use decryptUnderLMK(data) and encryptUnderLMK(data) functions and logDebug(msg) provided by the logic package.
}
```

The following host functions are exported to the WASM module and available in `internal/hsm/logic/host.go`:

```go
//go:wasm-module env
//export EncryptUnderLMK
func wasmEncryptUnderLMK(ptr, length uint32) uint64

//go:wasm-module env
//export DecryptUnderLMK
func wasmDecryptUnderLMK(ptr, length uint32) uint64

//go:wasm-module env
//export log_debug
func wasmLogToHost(s string)
```

Add unit tests in `internal/hsm/logic/FO_test.go`.

### 2. Add go:generate Stub

In `commands/FO/gen.go`:

```go
//go:generate plugingen \
//    -cmd=FO \
//    -logic=github.com/andrei-cloud/go_hsm/internal/hsm/logic \
//    -out=.
package main
```

### 3. Generate Wrapper

Run in the new command directory:

```bash
cd commands/FO
go generate
``` 

This creates `main.go` with the WASM exports.

### 4. Build the Plugin

Compile with TinyGo:

```bash
tinygo build -o ../FO.wasm -target=wasi -scheduler=none -opt=z -no-debug ./commands/FO/main.go
rm ./commands/FO/main.go
```

## Contributing

We welcome new commands and improvements!  
1. Fork the repository.  
2. Implement logic, wrapper stub, and tests.  
3. Submit a pull request describing your command and how it works.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.
